# My SQL

## Normalisation Strategies

A **systematic approach**_ to design _efficient_ database structure for storage.

Efficiency implies:
1. Lower data _redundancy_
   Data doesn't have to be repeated, specially strings are expensive to maintain.
   Normalisation provides us a method to use integers mostly.
   A name of suppose a Course can be created once and can be used across the database.
   
2. Eliminates insertion, update and deletion anomalies
   Undesired insertion, update and deletion, will occur if everything is smudged together in one table.
   
3. Ensures logical and consistent data storage.
   This means data are meaningfully(logically) divided, example Student information goes under student table.
   Consistency means "Single Source of Truth", changing fee of a course reflects everywhere, because one source is being referenced. Everyone will know one truth.
   
**Data Integrity** implies data is accurate, complete, consistent and reliable.
   
> Normalization is a systematic approach in database design used to organize data efficiently. It reduces data redundancy, eliminates undesirablecharacteristics like insertion, update, and deletion anomalies, and ensures logical and consistent data storage.
 
## Normalisation Forms
3 rules to create efficient database structure.

#### 1NF - First Normal Form
* Each column contains atomic(indivisible) values.

**NotThis**
| **StudentID** | **Subjects**   |
|---------------|----------------|
| 1             | Maths, Physics |

**ButThis**
| **StudentID** | **Subjects** |
|---------------|--------------|
| 1             | Maths        |
| 1             | Physics      |

#### 2NF - Second Normal Form
* Already conforms to 1NF.
* No partial dependencies.

_Partial Dependency_ means a field should not depend on a part of a _composite key_, If there is a composite key all fields should depend on it.

_Composite Key_ means two or more fields acting as a primary key to represent a row of data.

**NotThis**
| **StudentID** | **CourseID** | **StudentName** | **CourseName** |
|---------------|--------------|-----------------|----------------|
| 1             | C101         | John Doe        | Maths          |

**ButThis**
_Students Table_
| **StudentID** | **StudentName** |
|---------------|-----------------|
| 1             | John Doe        |

_Course Table_
| **CourseID** | **CourseName** |
|--------------|----------------|
| 1            | Maths          |

_Enrollment Table_
| **StudentID** | **CourseID** |
|---------------|--------------|
| 1             | 1            |

#### 3NF - Third Normal Form
* Already conforms to 2NF.
* Has no Transitive dependency.

_Trasitive Dependency_ means any shall directly depend on the _primary key_ and not on a field that depends _primary key_. That is, a field should not depend indirectly to primary key.

**NotThis**
| **StudentID** | **StudentName** | **Department** | **DepartmentHead** |
|---------------|-----------------|----------------|--------------------|
| 1             | John Doe        | Maths          | Dr. Smith          |

_DepartmentHead_ has no direct dependency on _StudentID_
**ButThis**
| **StudentID** | **StudentName** | **DepartmentID** |
|---------------|-----------------|------------------|
| 1             | John Doe        | 1                |

| **DepartmentID** | **DepartmentName** | **DepartmentHead** |
|------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| 1                | Maths              | Dr. Smith          |
